- kubernetes is a orchestration tools.

- kubernetes cluster installation have 2 segment 
1. control plane : that manage all kubernetes services. that know as master node 
2. worker nodes : that use for run pods that instruction manage by control plane 

- kubernetes key components 
1. api server :::: The API server is a component of the Kubernetes control plane that exposes the Kubernetes API. 
The API server is the front end for the Kubernetes control plane. when we pass kubectl command instaruction that accept by api server.

2. etcd :::: Consistent and highly-available key value store used as Kubernetes' backing store for all cluster data.
If your Kubernetes cluster uses etcd as its backing store, make sure you have a back up plan for the data.

3. scheduler :::: Control plane component that watches for newly created Pods with no assigned node, and selects a node for them to run on.

4. controller manger / cloud controll manger :::: 
Control plane component that runs controller processes.

Logically, each controller is a separate process, but to reduce complexity, they are all compiled into a single binary and run in a single process.

There are many different types of controllers. Some examples of them are:

Node controller: Responsible for noticing and responding when nodes go down.
Job controller: Watches for Job objects that represent one-off tasks, then creates Pods to run those tasks to completion.
EndpointSlice controller: Populates EndpointSlice objects (to provide a link between Services and Pods).
ServiceAccount controller: Create default ServiceAccounts for new namespaces.

5. kubelet ::: 
An agent that runs on each node in the cluster. It makes sure that containers are running in a Pod.
The kubelet takes a set of PodSpecs that are provided through various mechanisms and ensures that the containers described 
in those PodSpecs are running and healthy. 
The kubelet doesn't manage containers which were not created by Kubernetes.

6. Kube-proxy ::: kube-proxy is a network proxy that runs on each node in your cluster, 
implementing part of the Kubernetes Service concept.
kube-proxy maintains network rules on nodes. These network rules allow network communication to your Pods 
from network sessions inside or outside of your cluster.
kube-proxy uses the operating system packet filtering layer if there is one and it's available. 
Otherwise, kube-proxy forwards the traffic itself.

kuberenetes intallation type 
1. Minitkube Setup :::: single node developement setup 
2. Kind Cluster :::: multi node production setup 
3. k3s :::: Racncher providided lightweight kubernetes setup 
4  Openshift ::: redhat provided kubenretes production cluster 


Minikube installation in Windows::: 
https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/?arch=%2Fwindows%2Fx86-64%2Fstable%2Fwindows+package+manager

in Linux :::: https://highskyit.com/install-kubernetes-minikube-cluster-in-linux/
kubectl installation is also availabel there. 
https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl-windows/